---
authors: [andreypopp]
title: What's new in esy 0.4.x
---

This is the first public blog post on the esy dev blog.  We've been writing
lots and lots of code to make esy work well, and until now we haven't
communicated much about esy.

<!--truncate-->

## What Is Esy

If you've stumbled upon this and don't know what esy is: esy is a
"package.json"-like workflow with first class support for native development.

Esy started as part of the [reason][reason] effort with the goal of
implementing isolated and fast native Reason/OCaml project builds that were
familiar to JavaScript developers. Esy itself is compiled natively,
and can manage packages for most compiled languages (we use it to
package/distribute C/C++ packages in addition to Reason and OCaml).

Esy should be familiar to anyone with experience with Yarn, or npm (just run
`esy` inside a directory with a `package.json`).

- esy provides a unified package management workflow that can install/build
  packages from [opam][opam] as well as native packages published to [npm][npm]

- esy is not tied to any particular choice of a language/platform. Though we are
  focusing on native Reason/OCaml first.

- esy is build-system agnostic: you don't have to port a project
  to some specific build system to make it work with esy.

- esy tries to provide "hermetic" builds so that builds of packages are
  unaffected by the system software installed at global paths: if it works on my
  machine then it should work on yours.

- esy caches built packages across projects: with a warm cache, new projects
  are cheap to initialise and build.

This is not an exhaustive list of esy features but we think these are the most
important points.
Read more about esy's motivations in the [esy docs][esydocs] 

## esy 0.4.x

We recently promoted the 0.4.9 release of esy as `latest`. That means if you
execute:

```shell
% npm install -g esy
```

You'll get `esy@0.4.9` which is packed with new features. Below we discuss some
of those.

### Plug'n'play Installations

**TL;DR:** esy won't populate `node_modules` directory with package sources
anymore, and esy now supports installing Plug'n'play(pnp) JavaScript
dependencies.

In its first iteration, `esy` initially installed all dependency sources into
`node_modules.` The benefit of this is that approach is that it was compatible
with popular JS tooling that relied on `node_modules` directory. The downside
was that for native packages (the main focus of esy) copying sources over from
cache to a `node_modules` directory was unnecessary and a waste of time and
disk space.

Furthermore, esy already builds projects purely out-of-source to ensure
reproducibility - installing into `node_modules` was merely done to adhere to
JavaScript's conventions, and it actually risked compromising reproducibility.

So how could esy achieve the best of both worlds (JS runtime compatibility) and
(maintaining reproducible package builds)?

Fortunately, Yarn team figured out how to ditch `node_modules` for JS packages.
They designed a new convention called [Plug'n'play installations][pnp] ("pnp").
Pnp is a way to run JS packages directly from the global package cache without
copying them to `node_modules`, while having Node, Webpack and other runtimes
to be able to resolve code from there.

As of 0.4.x, esy now places a copy of Yarn's `pnp.js` runtime at installation
time into your project when installing JavaScript dependencies. That `pnp.js`
allows `node`'s module resolution to work even if dependencies are not in
`node_modules`. That makes `esy` JavaScript dependencies more like native
dependencies &mdash; they don't have to be copied into `node_modules`.  Now,
even if your project has JavaScript dependencies, installations with a warm
cache are fast. Like, really fast (timings are for
[esy-ocaml/hello-reason][hello-reason] project):

```shell
% time esy install
info install 0.4.7
info fetching: done
info installing: done
esy install  0.08s user 0.06s system 93% cpu 0.142 total
```

This also means that esy is now compatible with the most important parts of the
JS ecosystem: webpack, jest, flow, react-scripts, rollup, prettier and others
which have all been made pnp compatible thanks to the efforts of Yarn. A few
npm packages have still not made themselves pnp compatible &mdash; you should
file issues on those projects requesting that they support pnp, so that they
can be used with Yarn pnp, esy, and any other package manager that adopts
the pnp standard.

The workflow for working with JS (non-native) packages with esy looks like this:

- After installing dependencies as usual, execute pnp-enabled NodeJs
  interpreter:

  ```shell
  % esy node
  ```
- Execute npm binaries installed with packages like webpack, flow, jest and
  similar:

  ```shell
  % esy webpack
  % esy flow
  % esy jest
  ```

### Alpha preview of Windows support

Another huge feature which shipped in 0.4.x is preliminary native Windows
support! Install and use `esy` directly from native Windows command prompt
without needing to install anything else on your system.
Yes &mdash; it produces pure native Windows binaries that run on any Windows
machine.

Thanks to heroic effots of [Bryan Phelps][bryphe] and foundational work by the
OCaml community developing Reason/OCaml, native project management on Windows
are now as easy as on macOS/Linux:

```shell
C:\Users\Andrey> git clone https://github.com/facebook/reason
C:\Users\Andrey> cd reason
C:\Users\Andrey> esy
info install 0.4.9
info fetching: done
info installing: done
```

There is more to say about how Windows support is implemented in esy and we
will make sure there's a dedicated post on this in the near future where we
will describe some of the foundational compiler and tooling work for Windows
that the OCaml community has invested in.

Note though that Windows support is still considered alpha &mdash; there are
rough edges which needs to be fixed. If you are a developer who works on Windows
and want to help &mdash; jump into [esy/esy issues labelled
"Windows"][win-issues] and help us! The good thing is that we have CI running on
Windows too (a big thank you to [Ulrik Strid][ulrikstrid] for making sure a large
part of our test suite can run on Windows).

### Other 0.4.x goodies

There are lots and lots of changes in the 0.4.x release line, which could have
arguably been versioned `0.5.x`. In the future, we are aiming for more
incremental releases.

There are too many new features to list, but to highlight a couple of entries
in the [CHANGELOG][]:

- Improved workflow for linked packages: working on multiple packages in
  development is now more efficient and esy allows more flexibility in how you
  organize your project.

- Support for multiple isolated environments constructed on the fly from
  package configs. Now you may have multiple `.json` configurations in your
  project root (similar to a monorepo) and install/build them in total
  isolation. If you have a `package.dev.json` file you can use it explicitly:

  ```shell
  % esy @package.dev.json build
  ```

- Flexible package override mechanism which allows turning any source code
  distribution into an esy package, bringing it into your project with all the
  benefits of the esy workflow: cached builds, isolated environments, etc.
  This lets you turn any git hash or URL into an esy package without forking
  it, even if that package doesn't have a `package.json` file.

  ```json
  {
    "resolutions": {
      "pkg-config": {
        "source": "https://...",
        "override": {
          "build": [
            "./configure --prefix #{self.install}",
            "make"
          ],
          "install": [
            "make install"
          ]
        }
      }
    }
  ```

- Numerous improvements to esy's user interface: new commands (`esy show` and
  `esy status`), faster `esy x ...` command invocations, a new set of low level
  plumbing commands for "scriptable" esy workflows, ...

- New `esy.lock` format which is easier to review on updates.

- Bug fixes, bug fixes, bug fixes, ...

Some of these features are not documented yet properly but we'll make sure we do
this and then post updates on this blog.

Stay tuned!

[esydocs]: https://esy.sh/docs/en/what-why.html
[reason]: https://reasonml.github.io
[hello-reason]: https://github.com/esy-ocaml/hello-reason
[opam]: https://opam.ocaml.org/
[npm]: https://npmjs.com/
[pnp]: https://github.com/arcanis/rfcs/blob/6fc13d52f43eff45b7b46b707f3115cc63d0ea5f/accepted/0000-plug-an-play.md
[yarn]: http://yarnpkg.com/
[bryphe]: https://github.com/bryphe
[ulrikstrid]: https://github.com/ulrikstrid
[win-issues]: https://github.com/esy/esy/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Awindows
[CHANGELOG]: https://github.com/esy/esy/blob/496923fce0412f1e3e81ebfa8797a4e09f28ecd4/CHANGELOG.md#048--latest
