---
author: Manas Jayanth
authorURL: https://twitter.com/ManasJayanth
title: New release - 0.6.0 :tada:
---

We went quite again for a while with the blog - between the last post, we released 0.5.* and now 0.6.0.
0.6.0 has been a big one - we received contributions from 28 contributors! Thank you everyone!
0.6.0 is an important release for a lot of reasons. Let's take a quick look at them
  
<!--truncate-->

## `esy cleanup`

We added a sub-command `cleanup` to reclaim disk space by purging
unused builds. Over time, cached builds would just accumulate in
`~/.esy` and the only way to reclaim space was to delete it
entirely. Users had no way of knowing which cached builds were in use
by projects and would endup seeing long build times again after deleting the the cached directory

`esy cleanup` takes in a list of projects in use as arguments and
removes all cached builds not needed by any of them
	
A quick explanation can be found [here][esy-cleanup-reference] 
   
## Improved solver performance with better CUDF encoding

We re-worked our CUDF encoding that improved our solver
performance, fixed [critical bug](https://github.com/esy/esy/issues/883) and removed a major blocker
for `conflicts` formula in opam files. More on this can found at issue [#888](https://github.com/esy/esy/issues/888)


## Recursive fetching of submodules, when building packages from source 

As a move towards ensuring better compatibility with opam, we
recursively fetch submodules when fetching from git sources 

## Long paths on Windows

We were earlier constrained to only use 33 characters in the
artifact paths in our binaries on Windows - this caused
relocatability issues and delayed our plans of fetching prebuilts
for esy sandbox. With this release, esy now enables long paths on
supported Windows machines and brings back relocatability (and
there shorted build times with prebuilts) back on the table

## Notable fixes

   1. Fixes made to translation of ocaml package version constraint
      from opam to npm package universe. Earlier, the constraint
      solver wouldn't fetch dune 2.0 because of incorrect translation https://github.com/esy/esy/pull/1028
   2. More robust project discovery
   3. Improved git source parsing
   4. Test suite improvements
   5. Tons of documentation update (And we're still looking for more
      help there!)
   6. New command esy run-script SCRIPTNAME which provides a future proof way of running package.json scripts 

The entire changelog can be found [here][CHANGELOG]

[esy-cleanup-reference]: https://esy.sh/docs/en/commands.html#esy-cleanup
[CHANGELOG]: https://github.com/esy/esy/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#060--latest
